Welcome back to part two of the Python crash course.
Let's jump back to the Jupiter note book and get started.
In part one we discussed all the basic data structures that Python has to offer.
Now let's discuss some of the basic operators such as comparison operators and logic operators as well
as discussing for loops.
And while ops Let's start comparison operators comparison operators just the lights compare to different
variables or two different numbers to different strings etc. and then get back some sort of boolean
value either true or false.
For example if I want to check if someone greater than two.
Well that returns false is one less than five that returns true.
So let's walk through a couple more of these.
I can do greater than or equal to I can do less than or equal to.
And then I can check for equality using two equal science as one equal to one.
Well that's true and I can do the same thing for strings is a equal to a.
Well that's true.
And no this is case sensitive.
So capital A.
Equal to a that's going to return false.
Those are not exactly the same.
And if you want to do inequality it's just an exclamation point.
So is one not equal to two.
Well that returns true.
They are not equal to each other.
Now let's discuss logic operators logic operators this alliance combine multiple comparison operations.
For example if I want to check is one equal to 1 well that returns true.
And if I want check two conditions and I just use and.
And then in parentheses I can put in the new condition.
So I want to check is one equal to 1 and is lower case a lower case a less true.
For example I may change just one of these and that returns false.
So I always recommend using parentheses whenever you use logic operators but you don't actually need
them in a lot of cases.
So if I just run this it will run fine.
But I always recommend having parentheses makes it a little more readable in my opinion and also make
sure that you don't get any errors.
OK.
So that's the and comparison and the logic operator excuse me.
And then there's the OR logic operator.
So a lot of times in other languages these are either ampersands or pipe operators.
Luckily for us it's just simple English are for or.
And then and for ends and you can do more than just two you can kind of stack these on.
So say and maybe on.
Three equals three that returns false again.
So let's change one of these to be 1 run this and then that's true.
So that's really all we need to know about logic in comparison operators.
Now discuss if elif and L statements so these are essentially just if else if and L statements.
This is quite simple in Python.
All you have say is if and then whatever condition you want to track.
So for example if one is equal to one colon and you notice when I hit enter I get an indentation there.
So I found the pencil on whitespace so unlike other languages that will separate the sort of code blocks
with curly braces Python just uses whitespace and indentation.
That's why a lot of times is recommended for beginners or a lot of people really like programming in
it because the sort of whitespace makes things readable and makes things very simplistic.
So if one is equal to one I want to print I don't know.
Yeah.
And then we get out.
So let's say if one is equal to to print.
Yeah if I run the cell I don't get anything back which makes sense because one is like two.
So that's a simple if statement.
Now I'll show you an if else statement so I can say if one is equal to two Prince work out if I want
to add an else to this then all I have to do is line up the else with that if and else doesn't have
any condition because it's kind of a last case thing.
And then we'll say nope and let's make sure that's all in a string.
And then shift enter and you get back.
Nope.
So if one is equal to two.
Well that never executed.
So then we get else.
Prince Nope if you want to check for more conditions you just add an email if so that's Ilive right
there.
And then you can add in the condition and this condition doesn't need to be in print.
So a lot of times in other languages you would see a princess here and then some sort of condition check.
In Python you don't actually need it.
Everything just works off that colon.
So here I'll say if three to three colon and note want to hit enter.
There's automatic indentation there will Prince second condition this true.
So I run this second condition.
True.
Great.
So that's really the basics of it if you or else statement so moving along let's talk about four loops.
So for loops in Python are actually quite simple.
You can for a loop through a lot of different sort of sequences or objects including lists dictionaries
and tuples.
We'll just focus on lists and that's basically what we're going to be using throughout the course as
far as for loops I will say a sequence 1 two 3 let's add a couple more numbers four or five.
So there's a C Q And just a list.
And I'm going to say for item in that list which is sequence colon.
Note the and then Station and then we can do something such as print every item in that sequence.
And now that gives you back one two three four five.
Now a common point of confusion for newcomers to Python is does it have to be this keyword item.
Well actually no.
This can just be any temporary real variable name that you want.
So let's make it really obvious by calling it jelly.
And if I run this I get back to the exact same result.
Perfect.
So I also don't actually need to use this variable.
So for example I can say four elements in sequence Prince high.
And then if I run this I get.
Hi hi hi.
Hi etc..
And then I can also use something like elements plus elements and then I get two four six eight 10 so
basically doubling each element in that sequence so that's all you have to do for a for loop is just
for then whatever temporary element variable name you want there in and then whatever sequence you're
using for that for loop.
Quite simple.
Now let's discuss while loops.
So while loops keep running while the condition is true.
So I will say icicle to one and then while some condition for example while I is less than 5 and currently
it's to 1 so that makes sense I will Prince is curly brackets.
And then I will say that format's in her I there and then I don't want this to run forever.
So let's say I is equal to I plus 1 then I do shift center and I get 1 2 3 4.
So it's actually happening here.
Well is equal to 1.
And while this condition is true I less than five.
I'm just going to print out eyes currently I cetera.
So it goes one two three four.
And on that very last one it says OK well now four plus one is five.
So I'm no longer less than five it's actually equal to it.
So this loop ends.
And that's the basics of a while loop.
Let's discuss two more things.
A range function and list comprehension often you'll want to quickly create a list of integers.
So for example a lot of operations really common to do something like 1 2 3 4 etc and then loop through
a certain number of items.
But you can actually really quickly create a list that looks like this using range.
So for Python 3 if I just say range of 5 it just gives back this sort of range generator but I can cast
it into a list and it gets me back a list of integers and I can actually specify the starting point
and the end point.
So if you're ever confused on what the function actually does you can just again use shift tab and it
will tell you the docstring.
So it's quite easy so range you can say stop and it gives you back that range object.
Or we could say the start and stop and you can even indicate a step size.
So let's see them in action.
I want to start at two and let's go five.
So something that's kind of confusing for beginners is why is 5 not included here.
Well you can think of it as basically up to but not including five.
So it only goes to four.
So we say the stop is up to but not including that integer.
That last integer.
And the reason for that is because indexing starts at zero.
So you can almost think of it as kind of taking away one.
All right.
So that's the basis of range.
And you'll commonly see ranged use in a for loop without this sort of list.
All she can say for x in range 5.
And then we'll say something like Prince PI and there we see high.
One two three four or five.
OK.
So this is 0 1 2 3 4.
So four is up to nine including five there.
And that's the basics of range.
And we'll see that every once in a while not too often throughout the course but it's common enough
that you should know it.
Finally let's discuss list comprehension.
So list comprehension is a really useful feature of Python.
Often you'll find yourself trying to build out a list.
So let me show you an example of that.
Point create a list one two three four five and then I will say out is equal to an empty list so just
square brackets.
And I'm going to say for now an X take out and append that number.
Squared.
And then outside of this for loop note my indentation how it's lining up at the fore.
So once that for loop is done I'm going to print that out list.
So let's run this and we get what we expect.
1 4 9 16 25.
So what am I doing here.
Well I have out as mantillas and I'm saying for OK for every number in that X append the squared number
of it and then at the end print out that entire list.
So 1 4 9 16 25.
This sort of action is so common in Python to build out a list this way that they've created essentially
a shortcut a way to flatten this out into what's known as a list comprehension.
So I'm going to convert this sort of for loop into a list comprehension.
And the way we do that is we say put everything inside the square brackets and then we start by saying
no.
To the power of two or whatever you're trying to append and then we say for now I'm in.
And then the iterable was X and if I run this this gives him back the exact same thing that this for
loop.
So you can think of it as just another way of writing out a for loop that particularly creates lists.
So if you ever find yourself constantly appending to a new list inside of a for loop you may want to
consider list comprehension as a possible solution just to flatten this out as far as readability is
concerned.
For newcomers this is not as readable as a for loop but once you end up working with Python a lot you'll
end up preferring list comprehension.
It's slightly faster.
There's a very tiny performance boost there.
But for certain situations it's negligible.
OK.
So that's really all we want to discuss.
For Part two coming up next we'll discuss functions lambda expressions and then methods as well.
OK.
Thanks and I'll see you at the next lecture.